---
title:  "Lambda and Sort"
date:   2020-11-15 22:33:00 +0800
categories: Python
tags: lambda, sort
---

# Coursera Plus

I guess my blogging frequency is kind of slow for a budding data analyst. It probably also does not show how excited I am on this journey. Nevertheless, it is the quality that counts and not the quantity.

Recently, I chanced upon a 7 day trial on Coursera for the [Python 3 Specialisation] by University of Michigan. As I had graduated from UMICH with my Masters in Naval Architecture and Engineering, I am aware of the quality and intensity of UMICH coursework. Since I did not have a proper introduction to Python, I thought I would try it for 7 days.

True to UMICH standards, the interactive textbook and videos helped to consolidate my Python knowledge. Hence I had actually signed up for the Coursera Plus membership for 1 year. I intend to take as much of data science courses offered by UMICH and other respectable universities and see where does it lead me to.

Since I had started on the trial till date, I am on the third course of the specialisation. That is an average 1.5 weeks per course. There are 5 courses in total. I was able to breeze through quickly for the first 2 courses based on my current knowledge. Today, I would like to share on the use of lambda function and its relation to the sorted function. I was at a lost as to the use of lambda function and the key parameter in sort until I completed UMICH course. It was such a simple explanation that I feel I must share it. So here goes.

# Lambda

In Python, we would define our own functions by the following.

def function_name(parameter1):
	return code
	
Lambda is nothing more but a simplified way of transforming the above function definition into a single line as follow. The pre-requisite is the code in the function must be sufficiently simple and straighforward. Hence, given the input parameters, an object is returned to the function_name.

function_name = lambda parameter1: code

# Sorted

The lambda format can be used in many different cases. One of the more common case which I am aware of is to define the key in the sorted method. The key is simply a function which is performed on each element of the old_list. The output from the function is written in a post-it note for that element. Then all the post-it notes for old_list is used to sort the original elements into the new_list based on natural rules such as numbers or alphabetical order. See the syntax as follow.

new_list = sorted(old_list, key=lambda par1: par1 + 1, reverse=False)

If a function is properly defined, it can also be used in place of the lambda function without the parenthesis as follow.

new_list = sorted(old_list, key=function_name, reverse=False)

Lastly, if you want to ensure the sorted method is able to perform tie breaker, the function for the key should return a tuple of values. They will be sorted based on the elements in the tuples. This means, if the first element is a tie, they will go to the second element and so on.

That is it for today's sharing. Onwards with my learning.

After this specialisation is completed, I will be doing the [Statistics with Python] specialisation also by UMICH. By the way, these are the pre-requisite courses for applying to UMICH [Masters in Applied Data Science].

[Python 3 Specialisation]: https://www.coursera.org/specializations/python-3-programming
[Statistics with Python]: https://www.coursera.org/specializations/statistics-with-python
[Masters in Applied Data Science]: https://online.umich.edu/online-degrees/master-of-applied-data-science/